---
layout: post
title: ps | grep is broken on FreeBSD
tags: ps grep freebsd shell
---

It is true.  Even on the latest FreeBSD 11.0 (I checked the source tree).

<!--more-->

`ps | grep procName` can fail.

`$(ps -p pid)` can fail.

`ps` itself on a non-interactive shell can fail.

They can fail if _procName_ comes somewhere after 79 characters
(e.g. /abc/def/ghi/.../procName).

Or if you're using `ps -o comm=` and trying to match against a command
line, it can fail if the command line became too long.

### 79 ought to be enough

I looked up the source code for FreeBSD (8.4) `ps`, and here it is:

{% highlight C %}
/* ... */
else if ((ioctl(STDOUT_FILENO, TIOCGWINSZ, (char *)&ws) == -1 &&
    ioctl(STDERR_FILENO, TIOCGWINSZ, (char *)&ws) == -1 &&
    ioctl(STDIN_FILENO,  TIOCGWINSZ, (char *)&ws) == -1) ||
    ws.ws_col == 0)
        termwidth = 79;
{% endhighlight %}

What that's saying is: if you're not on a terminal, or if your system
is unable to tell us how wide your terminal is, then we'll assume your
terminal is 79 characters wide!

I wrote a program to test when the `ioctl()` above returns non-zero.
It does if:

* You're piping `ps` to another program, say `grep`
* You're running a non-interactive shell (e.g. over ssh: Ansible!)

Shouldn't we assume _unlimited_ width, if we're not really writing to
a terminal?  Go figure.

### The fix

Anyway, the fix is: Use the `-w` option.  TWICE.  So it is actually:
`-ww`.  Unless you want your terminal to only go up from 79 to 131
characters.  I'm not kidding!

{% highlight C %}
    case 'w':
        if (wflag)
            termwidth = UNLIMITED;
        else if (termwidth < 131)
            termwidth = 131;
        wflag++;
        break;
{% endhighlight C %}

So, please use: `ps -ww | grep procName`.  Thank you.

### What about Linux and Mac?

Both of these systems behave OK.  Linux gets `ps` from _procps_, which
has this piece of code:

{% highlight C %}
142   if(!isatty(STDOUT_FILENO)) screen_cols = OUTBUF_SIZE;
{% endhighlight %}

The `ps` on Mac works as expected, although the man page says it's
derived from BSD.  Did Steve Jobs run into it and then get it fixed?
;-)
