---
layout: post
title: Privacy in today's age with a SOCKS proxy
tags: privacy networking socks ssh
newlink: /posts/2019-08-07-socks/
---

Say you are at a cafe, and you want to surf the Web.  But the WiFi is
not secure.  Or say your company lets you bring your laptop, but what
if its firewall has blocked your favorite website?  Is there no hope,
besides paying $15 to a VPN provider?

There is, and it costs about $3.50 per month as of this writing.

<!--more-->

### Wear some SOCKS

You see, there is this thing called a "SOCKS proxy".  It acts as a
middleman between you and a Website.  The SSH server that comes with
any standard Linux distribution can act as a SOCKS proxy for you.
Fire up a Linux box on AWS Lightsail (fixed monthly charges), and
you're pretty much all set.  It's almost too good to be true.

Here is the configuration you need to set on your laptop, under
`~/.ssh/config`:

```
Host lightsail
  Hostname (your_lightsail_ip)
  User ubuntu
  IdentityFile (path_to_your_public_key)
  DynamicForward 1336
  Compression yes
```

Next, set your browser to use a SOCKSv5 proxy with the IP address
127.0.0.1, port 1336.  You can also set it to do DNS resolution for
you, if you don't want your cafe (or company) to know that you're
going to, say, jobsearch.com.

You can also set this system-wide.  On Mac, go to Preferences >
Networking > Advanced > Proxy, and set the SOCKS proxy there.  This
will let apps like Slack use your proxy.  I set it on both my browser
and at the system.

If your Lightsail VM is close enough to where you live, the additional
latency is almost negligible.  I browse the Web fine without any
problems.

With this setup, the traffic between your laptop and the Lightsail VM
is fully encrypted.  This means, neither your home WiFi router, nor
your ISP (or telecom provider, if you're using 4G hotspot) router can
see what Websites you're visiting.

To confirm that your setup is working, try looking up the location of
your IP address on Google.  It should show your Lightsail VM location.

### Caveats

There are some caveats worth noting about in this solution.

First, your WiFi (or Ethernet) network should not block traffic to and
from port 22 (the SSH port).  This is usually not a problem.

Second, Web traffic is still in the plain between the SOCKS proxy and
the Web server, unless you are visiting a HTTPS Web site.  Stating the
obvious here. :-) I think it's still much better privacy than the
default.

Third, you will need to log in to your Lightsail IP address every time
you open your laptop.  It helps to make your Lightsail IP address
static (AWS allows this).  This can be an annoyance, but you can
easily automate it with a cron job that checks every second if port
1336 is open.  I simply log in manually every time; it doesn't bother
me much.

Finally, your Linux VM on Lightsail cannot run in its default
configuration.  It should be hardened for security.  As bare minimum,
you should do the following on the Lightsail VM:

* SSH has 2-factor authentication from way back, and it's called
  host-based authentication.  Enable this in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`
  and copy your laptop's public key to it.  Disable password-based
  access.
* Enable and start the firewall, it's called ufw on Ubuntu.  Open only
  port 22, and enable rate-limiting on it.
* Subscribe to security updates for ufw, sshd and Linux.  Enable
  automatic security updates if possible.

It may be better to use OpenBSD instead of Linux, because of its more
secure "closed-by-default" configuration.  I'm on Linux, for now.
