---
layout: post
title: How are you saving your knowledge?
tags: notes knowledge mindmap
newlink: /posts/2020-05-02-notes/
---

We live in a "knowledge economy".  Every day brings with it new
information.  Do you have an external system to store your knowledge
efficiently and effectively?

<!--more-->

There's a constant stream of Web sites, books, newsletters, courses
online and a lot of that information is something I need to keep
either in my head, or in some place outside that's readily accessible.
My work often needs researching online, understanding a complex code
base, or brainstorming new ideas.  All of this becomes harder if I
don't have an effective system to represent knowledge, because I
cannot use all the information to learn, understand or make decisions.
In fact, it degenerates into a non-system: I'll only remember the most
recent, or the most egregious material.  So, in order to combat this,
I've tried a lot of things over the years from the simplest to the
sophisticated: browser bookmarks, Post-Its and handwritten notes,
folders, both paper and digital, Evernote, wiki.  None of these has
worked well for me.

Sometime earlier this year, I realized that knowledge is best
represented as a hierarchical graph data structure: you have nodes
that represent information, and edges that connect disparate
information nodes.  You also compress information by summarizing them
and storing them as higher-order nodes.  So you have a hierarchical
graph in your head.  You constantly move and reorganize nodes, as you
digest new information.  Do you see the problem now?  Some of the
tools I tried out are linear, not graphical: such as text notes you
capture in a diary or on Evernote.  Notebooks cannot capture
hyperlinks, pictures, or let us navigate easily.  The linear narrative
is good for stories, not knowledge.  Folders can aggregate
information, but they don't provide enough context on each file or
across files.

Armed with this discovery, I started using a system that's closer to
what my brain uses: mind maps.  I cannot thank myself enough for
trying this out, because it has proved to be exactly the system I was
looking for.

A mind map is a graph, again mostly hierarchical.  For any node, I can
add notes to provide context, hyperlinks to Web pages, and any
relevant pictures.  For some nodes, I also add icons such as ticks or
cautions, or typographical highlights.  The graphs are very much
alive, because I update them as I incorporate new knowledge.
Sometimes a map grows too big, but I can branch it off into its own
graph, linked back to the original map.  Can you imagine doing all of
this on any other system?

Since switching to mind maps, I've captured talks, courses, books
efficiently.  I can go back to them and navigate easily, going down
only the hierarchy that interests me.  I get a big picture overview by
looking at the top-level nodes, but also how they are all connected
together by the edges.  I can brainstorm efficiently, curating them as
I move the nodes around.  My code reviews are better now, because I go
from code-level nodes to higher-level concept nodes.  Spaced
repetition assumes you've got material to review: with mind maps,
there's material, and it's accessible.  I even collect and manage my
TODOs in a map, so that I can see how my projects are making progress.
Earlier, I felt a sense of despair that I was losing the battle of
information.  Now I feel I'm more in control.

I encourage you to try a mind map.  I think schools and universities
should publish such maps for material they intend to teach.  This can
vastly improve the effectiveness of education, because what is it if
not a transfer of knowledge from the teacher to the student?

I made a mind map of this blog post, to give an example.  It also has
links to two other mind maps of talks I recently listened to.

<iframe width="600" height="400" frameborder="0" src="https://www.mindmeister.com/maps/public_map_shell/1491613061/mind-maps-for-knowledge-representation?width=600&height=400&z=auto&no_share=1" scrolling="no" style="overflow: hidden; margin-bottom: 5px;">Your browser is not able to display frames. Please visit <a href="https://www.mindmeister.com/1491613061/mind-maps-for-knowledge-representation" target="_blank">Mind maps for knowledge representation</a> on MindMeister.</iframe><div class="mb-5"><a href="https://www.mindmeister.com/1491613061/mind-maps-for-knowledge-representation" target="_blank">Mind maps for knowledge representation</a> by <a href="https://www.mindmeister.com/users/channel/43268399" target="_blank">Deepak Nagaraj</a></div>

